Dzongsar Khyentse on Aung Suu Kyi and the West
a letter of support from Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche
Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche rips the west over
hypocritical treatment of Aung San Suu Kyi.
The Buddhist Channel, Nov 24, 2018
 Renowned Tibetan Buddhism teacher Dzongsar Khyentse Rinpoche has let
ripped western institutions over what he calls as "blatant double standards" over
their treatment of Aung San Suu Kyi, the first and incumbent State Counsellor of
Myanmar, a position akin to a prime minister. His complaints were over the spate
of withdrawals of international awards to the Burmese politician, such as those
from Amnesty International as well as honorary citizenship from Canada.
 While acknowledging that he does not condone the Burmese military treatment of
the Rohingyas, Rinpoche nevertheless lambasted these western institutions as
purveyors of "...colonial structures and world-view ... imposed on us (Asians) and
that persist to this day."
He praises Aung San Suu Kyi for standing up to this hypocrisy and implores
Asians to ".... to restore the dignity of our own great eastern wisdom traditions and
legacies."
Here is his letter in full:
Dear Honourable Aung San Suu Kyi,
 In these difficult times, I am moved to write to you to express my deep respect
and appreciation for all you have done over so many years to fight for your
people's freedoms, and especially for your great courage and perseverance in
upholding your principles through nearly 15 years of house arrest.
 You remain in my mind a true heroine of this age, more than worthy of the Nobel
Prize and other honours you have received. And so, I am also writing to tell you
that l have been appalled in recent months at the removal of many of those awards
- from the cities of Edinburgh, Oxford, Glasgow and Dublin to your honorary
Canadian citizenship.
 Those shocking actions against you reveal a blatant double standard.
 Without doing anything and just eight months into office, President Obama was
awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. Yet no one demanded it be taken away after he
killed thousands of civilians in Mid-east drone strikes and bombings. In fact, de1
nuclearizing North Korea will do more for world peace than anything Obama ever
did, making Donald Trump and Kim Jong-un far worthier of a Nobel Prize.
 [To this day, Kim Jung-Un has not removed any nuclear weapons at all, and
Trump is a compulsory liar and a joke. So far, it has all been a public relation
stunt without content. In fact, Kim Jung-Un is expanding his military and
remains a terrible dictator, that put Koreans in concentration camps in great
numbers. None of these two persons merit any prizes. Obama did not change
much, but at least he tried... This comment is by Lama Tendar Olaf Hoeyer.]
 More subtly, however the hypocrisy of taking away awards is a sign of the
insidious colonialism that continues to strangle Asia and the world. We Asians
have been taught to disparage our own noble traditions and instead to treasure
western values, literature and music, to chew gum and wear faded jeans, to
embrace Facebook and Amazon, and to ape western manners and institutions.
 We are badgered to feel guilt for the European Holocaust of World War 2, while
our own holocausts are conveniently forgotten and buried in the dustbin of history.
How many westerners mourn the 15 million displaced and million killed in
Britain's partition of India, or the five million civilians killed in Korea and
Vietnam?
 Who recalls that the US. dropped two million tons of bombs on Laos between
1964 and 1973. almost equal to all the bombs it dropped on Europe and Asia
during all of World War 2 - making Laos the most heavily bombed country in
history relative to population size. And how quickly have we forgotten the
genocidal holocausts of the 16th to 18th centuries that killed an estimated 130
million native Americans - more than 90% of indigenous peoples there. We nonwesterners have considerable cause for grievance against those European invaders
who now claim moral authority over our lives.
 Today, we are so infatuated with the west and so immersed in the western mindset
that such criticism is seen as almost sacrilegious. So, I must add that nothing I am
writing to you here signifies any lack of appreciation for the west's great
contributions to human civilisation. From superb music, art and literature to
brilliant scientific and medical breakthroughs to philosophies like anarchism, the
creations of the west are astounding.
 But watching the self-righteous western actions against you in recent months. I
have become convinced it is finally time to tell the truth about the colonial
structures and world-view they imposed on us and that persist to this day. Above
all, it is time to restore the dignity of our own great eastern wisdom traditions and
legacies.
[How can ethnic cleansing and genocide express 'the dignity of our great eastern
wisdom traditions and legacies"? There is a giant hole in Dzongsar Khyentse's
form of argument here.]
 Many mistakenly think the “colonial” era of western invasion and control is long
past, since most Asian and African countries won apparent political independence
2
more than half a century ago. But as “post-colonialists” rightly note, the economic
and political structure of the colonial era continues to shape life around the world.
In fact, western ideologies, lifestyles and systems of morality are now more
deeply, subtly and dangerously entrenched than ever. Alien to the profound
wisdom traditions of the east, today's colonial legacy continues to eat away at and
destroy our own heritage.
 For instance, we once knew how to respect and live in harmony with nature.
Today, we have been swallowed into the western capitalist system together with its
greedy materialism, traffic jams, pollution, greenhouse gas emissions and
voracious resource consumption. If that system is not even serving the west and is
literally destroying the planet, why should it serve the east?
 And to prop up that system, the west is so proud of its supposed “human rights”
and "democracy” that we are blindly supposed to imitate. But it is only its limited
individual rights the west cares about and those mostly for the rich and powerful.
The US and most other western constitutions give no protection to social rights
like the right to a job, housing, education, health care and safe drinking water.
 And when it suits, the west blatantly violates its vaunted individual rights. Writing
this supposedly exercises my right to free speech. But free speech is a hoax if
listeners are intolerant and if they label, stigmatise and demonise the writer. In
fact, "the tyranny of the majority” these days includes so-called “liberals” who on
US campuses now regularly shut down views they do not agree with, especially if
those views might offend some groups.
 And that is so ironic, because western liberals' current obsession with identity
politics plays right into the hands of their professed enemies. In the words of ultrarightist Steve Bannon: “The longer they talk about identity politics, I got 'em. I
want them to talk about racism every day. If the left is focused on race and identity
and we go with economic nationalism, we can crush [them]."
 In fact, to rebel against the whole capitalist, liberal-democratic syndrome, China,
Vietnam, Laos and North Korea swallowed another western import, communism,
which is totally at odds with their own history and culture. No wonder that fake
model is collapsing everywhere into the embrace of the very capitalism it sought to
bypass.
 Even the very word "development” is a western colonial imposition. The
industrialised western countries are considered "developed", while we are
supposed to “develop” towards their dysfunctional western ideal. For the west
there is only one acceptable direction for the whole world - to be capitalist,
“democratic”, individualist, and therefore “developed,” and to recklessly consume
more.
 In the meantime, our own views and traditions that could literally save humankind
are labelled “undeveloped” and “superstitious.” While we are expected to kowtow
to western morality, we ignore the profound moral values arising from our eastern
wisdom heritage that the colonisers severed, taught us to hate, and supplanted with
their own.
3
 And those parts of our tradition the west finds useful are now also colonised and
co-opted, entirely missing yoga’s profound Indian wisdom heritage. Florida and
California now “certify” yoga teachers.
 Some western "Buddhist teachers” write books that conveniently bend Buddhist
teachings to fit their own rational, scientific proclivities. And self-proclaimed
”gurus” edit and plagiarise handy bits of those teachings as their own invention,
missing the essence and never acknowledging the source. In fact, Buddhism itself
is being colonised and rendered unrecognisable as its extraordinary insights and
methods are altered, dismantled and eviscerated to fit western science and selfhelp fads.
 To maintain “objectivity" and be socially accepted, Buddhist academics in suits
and ties hide their own affiliation, avoid Buddhist terminology and reserve any
display of eastern culture for fancy dress parties. Even eastern teachers now
consciously shun Buddhist iconography and imagery and custom-tailor their
vipassana and other meditations to suit western secular expectations. More widely,
Asian professionals are quick to bow down to western values to dismiss their own
traditions as archaic and superstitious, to wrongly equate modernisation with
westernisation, and thereby to reap the rewards of being labelled “modern,
progressive and open-minded”. Without western validation, they see their own
accomplishments as worthless.
 The irony is that when Japanese, Korean and Chinese musicians learn and play
western classical music, they have utmost respect for the integrity of the music as
it is and as it was composed. Even in daily life and popular culture, Asians
faithfully try to copy the way westerners think, look and act, in sharp contrast too
many western scholars manipulate, cherry pick and even alter what they take from
the east and then impose their own modified version on us with obstinate moral
authority.
 This kind of psychological and moralising colonialism is subtle and dangerous, as
you yourself have painfully experienced. For the west, the only qualified ”victims”
are those the west itself has oppressed, and the rest of us are expected to join their
chorus of guilt and penance.
 We dare not point out that their so-called victims have brutally victimised our
people for centuries. To me, the bestowal and removal of your awards typifies the
culture of hypocrisy created by that pervasive colonial legacy. Those awards mean
nothing beyond another means to colonise us and pull us into the western value
system, while they congratulate themselves. In fact, I personally pay the postage
for you to send your honorary Canadian citizenship back to Ottawa. You don't
need it!
 For me, you remain the heroine you truly are. And for so many who dare not
speak up but who secretly agree, you personify our own Me Too movement.
 None of what I write here justifies wrongs committed by the Burmese military.
What I am saying is simply that the western actions against you and the whole
historical and ongoing colonial legacy they reflect are wrong. The post-colonial
impact of economic domination and ideological imposition is far more harmful to
4
our peoples and to the planet than anything you have done. A guilty person cannot
be a judge and has no credential either to give or remove an award.
 As well, nothing I write here denies the suffering of the Rohingya people. But
instead of blaming you, will the British at least acknowledge their colonial
responsibility for bringing most Rohingyas from Bengal in the 19th and 20th
centuries as cheap labour to work the Burmese rice paddies?
 If the British really care and want to redress the harm they have done to Burma
and the Rohingya, they will migrate the Rohingya to the U.K. and give them
citizenship instead of letting them languish in refugee camps. And instead of
revoking your awards as they've done, Oxford, Sheffield, Newcastle, Edinburgh
and Glasgow will resettle the Rohingya there.
 Many will label what I am writing to you here as "partisan", “west-bashing” and
more. But we have been so deeply twisted by western colonialism for so long that
we now have no choice but to break the silence, speak up, and address what has
long been taboo. We have long celebrated US and British war victories but do we
dare to look at what that western global domination has meant for us?
 If we avoid starting this conversation ourselves, and if India, China and others
keep sucking up to western models, the only ones who speak up will be those who
make no secret of their hatred for the west. Do we really want to leave the playing
field open only to ISIS and the worst extremists to call a spade a spade in
challenging western arrogance?
 And that is why I am writing this to you - because for many of us, you superbly
represent that middle way. You have stood strong, held to your principles, fought
untiringly for your people and refused to bow to the self-righteous western
moralising that now reveals itself in the removal of these awards. In that, be
assured you have our admiration and support.
 It is more difficult to suggest an effective strategy for a genuine dialogue on the
tough issues I am raising here. It seems that the western colonisers will only listen
if we have a lot of oil or other resources they need.
 Alternatively, we have to seek out westerners’ weak spot which appears to be their
pride and guilt. These days they do not dare criticise Muslims or Jews for fear of
being labelled Islamophobic or anti-Semitic. So perhaps we need to start by
coining new words for anti-Buddhist and anti-Asian bias to evoke their guilt and
fear of those phobias.
 Again, please accept my heartfelt thanks for all you have done and continue to do
for your people and for our proud eastern heritage.
 Yours sincerely,
Dzongsar Iamyang Khyentse
